DOCS: Document webauthn with device ID (#2830)
pomerium/pomerium: docs/docs/topics/device-identity.md

---

> title: Device Authentication

Author: @desimone to note: Not sure if the title "Device Authentication" or the file name "device-identity" is more appropriate. Pick one, and I'll standardize.

Reviewer: No perfect choice here but I like device identity.

description: >-
  Learn about how WebAuthn is used to authenticate and authorize access using Device ID and state.
---

## Device Identity

> One of the core components of a zero-trust security model is device authentication. Think of it as a component of multi-factor authentication; In addition to "what you know" (password) and "who you are" (biometrics, face recognition, etc), device authentication covers "what you have" by confirming that the device you are using to access a system is trusted.

Reviewer: ```
Think of it as a component of multi-factor authentication; In addition to "what you know" (password) and "who you are" (biometrics, face recognition, etc), device authentication covers "what you have" by confirming that the device you are using to access a system is trusted.
```

I think this is a useful explanation of the role a TEE can play in MFA; but I think we want to cover how this plays into the goals of a zero-trust model. User and device identity play a key role in being able to move beyond a trusted perimeter. ZT is about trusted device and user, not about trusted networks.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the core components of a zero-trust security model is device authentication, whereby a device's identity and state can be factored into access control decisions. Think of it as similar to multi-factor authentication (**MFA**); where MFA covers "what you know" (password) and "who you are" (biometrics, face recognition, etc), device authentication asks "is this device safe?" by confirming that the device you are using to access a system is trusted.
```

Incomplete on its own, but a lead-in to the additional explanation you requested below.

> Device authentication is becoming more widely discussed as more products begin to use or require it. For example, Windows 11 generated a lot of [news stories][verge-tpm] by [requiring TPM 2.0][win11-reqs].

Author: To be read as a follow-up to the previous paragraph:

```suggestion
While your identity provider validates the user, and tools like JWTs and mTLS validate the traffic, device authentication (through WebAuthn) validates the end user's device. This protects a trusted user from accessing sensitive data from a potentially unsafe device, like their personal computer or phone. Additionally, it can validate that the trusted device is in a safe state by confirming trusted/patched versions of the operating system and/or web browser.

Device authentication is becoming more widely discussed as more products begin to use or require it. For example, Windows 11 generated a lot of [news stories][verge-tpm] by [requiring TPM 2.0][win11-reqs].
```

- TPM (Trusted Platform Module): These devices are usually built in to a product's mainboard, or can be installed in devices with a TPM header, as shown [here][toms-hardware-tpm]. They include a small processor to carry out cryptographic functions on the device, instead of on the system's processor where it could be interfered with. Trust is usually derived from a private key or certificate signed by a trusted manufacture's certificate authority.

- Mobile devices: Most newer Apple and Android devices include a [Secure Enclave][apple-enclave] or [Hardware-backed Keystore][android-keystore]

### Hardware Security Keys

Also known as cross-platform or roaming authenticators, these are authentication devices which can move with the user across different computers.

- FIDO U2F: This [open standard][fido-spec] is used by many products like Yubico's [Yubikey][yubikey-products] and Google's [Titan Security Key](https://support.google.com/titansecuritykey/answer/9115487?hl=en). They usually secure a private key used to decrypt information signed by an accessible public key.

## Device ID and State

> Implementation device authentication, regardless of the specific hardware used, provides two pieces of information: device ID and device state.

Author: This is missing a small but mighty word:

```suggestion
Implementation of device authentication, regardless of the specific hardware used, provides two pieces of information: device ID and device state.
```

Device ID is a unique identifying key that can only be created by the specific combination of hardware and software present on a specific device. For example, you will have a different device ID using the same computer with the same security key installed between different operating systems. Even on the same operating system, the device ID will be different when created in different web browsers.

The state is more complex, with more information about the device and software being used to generate the value. This includes the operating system and web browser version. This can be used by secure systems to ensure that users do not access sensitive information using software that has not been updated for, say, a known security flaw.

## WebAuthn

> Pomerium uses the [Web Authentication][webauthn-api] (**WebAuthN**) API to bring device authentication into your security framework. It enables users to register their device ID, and admins to require a trusted device before accessing one, several, or all services.

Author: ```suggestion
Pomerium uses the [Web Authentication][webauthn-api] (**WebAuthN**) API to bring device authentication into your security framework. It enables users to register their device ID, and admins to require a trusted device before accessing one, several, or all services.

You can review our implementation of the WebAuthn specification [on GitHub](https://github.com/pomerium/webauthn).
```

To get started, review the following pages:

- [Pomerium Policy Language](/docs/topcics/ppl.md) to learn how to build policies that use device ID.

> - [Enroll a Device](/guides/enroll-device.md) to teach end users how to enroll devices on Pomerium.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Enroll a Device](/guides/enroll-device.md) to teach end-users how to enroll devices on Pomerium.
```

---
title: Device Identity
description: >-
  Learn about how WebAuthn is used to authenticate and authorize access using Device ID and state.
sidebarDepth: 1
---

# Device Identity

> One of the core components of a zero-trust security model device identity, whereby a device's identity and state can be authenticated and factored into access control decisions. This topic page covers the concept of device identity and how it applies to the zero-trust model.

Author: Yea, it was a bad copy/pasta of parts from previous iterations. How about:
```suggestion
One of the core components of a zero-trust security model is **device identity**, which is the ability for a device to have a unique, unclonable identity string that can be authenticated and factored into access control decisions. This topic page covers the concept of device identity, and how it applies to the zero-trust model.
```

> One of the core components of a zero-trust security model device identity, whereby a device's identity and state can be authenticated and factored into access control decisions. This topic page covers the concept of device identity and how it applies to the zero-trust model.

Author: Yea, it was a bad copy/pasta of parts from previous iterations. How about:
```suggestion
One of the core components of a zero-trust security model is **device identity**, which is the ability for a device to have a unique, unclonable identity string that can be authenticated and factored into access control decisions. This topic page covers the concept of device identity, and how it applies to the zero-trust model.
```

I didn't include your changes because we say "a zero-trust security model" at the start of the paragraph, and I don't want it to read as redundant.

## Why Device Identity Is Important

The history of IT security has, until recently, mostly focused on user identity verification. In this model, access to a service is granted only after verifying a user's identity and authorization to that service. This was usually sufficient in scenarios where the user's access was physically limited to trusted devices in trusted physical and network spaces; a PC sitting in an office in the company headquarters on a local network, for example.

> Device identity is becoming more widely discussed as more products begin to use or require it. For example, Windows 11 generated a lot of news by [requiring TPM 2.0][win11-reqs], and Apple is taking steps to [eliminate passwords][apple-passkeys]:

Author: Lemme take a whack at it.
```suggestion
Hardware-backed device identity is becoming more widely discussed as more products begin to implement or require it across all tech industries. For example, Windows 11 generated a lot of news by [requiring TPM 2.0][win11-reqs], and Apple is taking steps to [eliminate passwords][apple-passkeys]:
```

| ![Verge Article Header and Apple Video Page](./img/verge-apple.png) |
|:--|
| **Sources:**<br />- <https://www.theverge.com/2021/6/25/22550376/microsoft-windows-11-tpm-chips-requirement-security><br/>-  <https://developer.apple.com/videos/play/wwdc2021/10106/> |

Device identity protects a trusted user from accessing sensitive data from a potentially unsafe device, like their personal computer or phone. Think of it as similar to multi-factor authentication (**MFA**); where MFA covers "what you know" (password) and "who you are" (biometrics, face recognition, etc), device identity asks "is this device safe?" by confirming that the device you are using to access a system is trusted.

> Device identity is similar but unique to MFA. Where MFA is an additional layer of protection on user identity, Device identity is a unique identifier that asserts trust of the hardware itself.

Author: Better, closer, warmer. How about:
```suggestion
Device identity is similar but unique to MFA. Where MFA is an additional layer of protection on user identity, hardware-backed device identity can be used to enhance and augment authorization decisions beyond the initial authentication flow. Where MFA increases the trust-level of a user, device identity provides trust for the device being used. More important, it denies access for non-trusted, potentially insecure devices.
```

> Device identity is similar but unique to MFA. Where MFA is an additional layer of protection on user identity, Device identity is a unique identifier that asserts trust of the hardware itself.

Reviewer: > More important, it denies access for non-trusted, potentially insecure devices.

I'm not sure if important needs to be an adverb; otherwise lgtm

> Device identity is similar but unique to MFA. Where MFA is an additional layer of protection on user identity, Device identity is a unique identifier that asserts trust of the hardware itself.

Author: I've adectived the former adverb.
```suggestion
Device identity is similar but unique to MFA. Where MFA is an additional layer of protection on user identity, hardware-backed device identity can be used to enhance and augment authorization decisions beyond the initial authentication flow. Where MFA increases the trust-level of a user, device identity provides trust for the device being used. More importantly, it denies access for non-trusted, potentially insecure devices.
```

## What Is Device Identity

> > When you remove "the perimeter" as the source of trust to your infrastructure, you must replace it with a level of trust for every person, **device**, and hop in the communication path. Where the other, more commonly implemented facets of zero-trust validates the user and traffic, device identity (through WebAuthn) validates the end user's device.

Author: I like it, will implement with a footer-style markdown link.

Device ID is a unique identifying key that can only be created by the specific combination of hardware and software present on a specific device. How this is accomplished is largely dependent on the tools available on the user hardware, which we've detailed below.

### Authenticated Device Types

> Device identity is made possible through trusted execution environment (**TEE**) devices that provide a hardware-attested identity. The specific implementation of this general concept is different across the devices that provide device identity, but they generally fall into two categories: secure enclaves and cross-platform security keys.

Author: As above, will use a footer link.

- Mobile devices: Most newer Apple and Android devices include a [Secure Enclave][apple-enclave] or [Hardware-backed Keystore][android-keystore]

#### Hardware Security Keys

Also known as cross-platform or roaming authenticators, these are authentication devices which can move with the user across different computers.

- FIDO U2F: This [open standard][fido-spec] is used by many products like Yubico's [Yubikey][yubikey-products] and Google's [Titan Security Key](https://support.google.com/titansecuritykey/answer/9115487?hl=en). They usually secure a private key used to decrypt information signed by an accessible public key.

::: tip Note
The nature of cross-platform keys mean they are not associated with a single end-user device. Pomerium policies can be written to allow these keys, or specified to only accept secure enclaves.
:::

## Implement Device Identity with Pomerium

> Pomerium supports policies that use device identity since version [0.16.0](/docs/upgrading.md#policy-for-device-identity). We use the [Web Authentication][webauthn-api] (**WebAuthN**) API to bring authentication and authorization based on device identity into your security framework. It enables users to register their device ID, and admins to require a trusted device before accessing one, several, or all services.

Author: Nice! Small grammar edit:

```suggestion
Pomerium supports policies that use device identity since version [0.16.0](/docs/upgrading.md#policy-for-device-identity). We use the [Web Authentication][webauthn-api] (**WebAuthN**) API to bring authentication and authorization based on device identity into your security framework. Pomerium's device identity support enables users to register their devices, and administrators to enforce access to applications and services to a particular set of trusted devices.
```

You can review our implementation of the WebAuthn specification [on GitHub](https://github.com/pomerium/webauthn).

To get started, review the following pages:

- [Pomerium Policy Language](/docs/topcics/ppl.md) to learn how to build policies that use device ID.
- [Enroll a Device](/guides/enroll-device.md) to teach end-users how to enroll devices on Pomerium.

> 

Author: > This may be formatted wrong

This gets into subjective territory, so it's not "wrong", but I would go with:

```suggestion
- [pomerium/webauthn](https://github.com/pomerium/webauthn) on GitHub, our implementation of the WebAuthn specification
```

If agreed, I'll implement this change locally since there's a newline between this entry and the others.

> 

Reviewer: 👍

## Looking Ahead: Device Posture

> Even if they only use the right device, what happens when a exploit is discovered in their OS or browser? How do you restrict access until the exploit is patched? Expanded iterations of device identity methods account for this using **device posture**, sometimes referred to as device state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if access is restricted to known devices, what happens when a user is found to have a vulnerable OS or browser version? How can an administrator ensure their network is not exposed, and that the user's system is promptly patched and remediated?  As secure enclave technologies evolve, **device posture** -- which is sometimes referred to as device state -- will play an increasingly important role in not only authorization decisions but also in helping to quickly remediate vulnerable corporate devices. 
```

Who is they? An administrator? A user? I think we should say a user. 

> Expanded iterations of device identity methods account for this using **device posture**, sometimes referred to as device state

What's odd is we go on to call it device state in the next paragraph.

Author: Agreed on all points. This is another case of content moved/shuffled around that needed better editing for it's new place in the overall doc.

Author: This addition, if agreeable, would make me :+1: on removing the following paragraph.
```suggestion
Even if access is restricted to known devices, what happens when a user is found to have a vulnerable OS or browser version? How can an administrator ensure their network is not exposed, and that the user's system is promptly patched and remediated?  As secure enclave technologies evolve, **device posture** -- which is sometimes referred to as device state -- will play an increasingly important role in not only authorization decisions but also in helping to quickly remediate vulnerable corporate devices. Device posture is a more complex superset of device identity, with more information about the device and software being used to generate the resulting identifier.
```

> A device state is more complex superset of device identity, with more information about the device and software being used to generate the resulting identifier. This includes the operating system and web browser version. Device posture can be used by secure systems to ensure that users do not access sensitive information using software that has not been updated for, say, a known security flaw.

Reviewer: I think the previous paragraph now addresses the key points. Thoughts? 

```suggestion
```

Author: Mostly yes, but there's one part of this paragraph I want to include above before signing off on removing it. Will make a suggestion above.
